---
title: Java Basic - Array
updated: 2015-12-01
layout: single
categories:
  - java
---

Array is a fundamental construct in any programming languages, which stores a fixed-size sequential collection of elements of the same type.

An array is used to store a collection of data, but it is often more useful to think of an array as a collection of variables of the same type.

## Array Declaration
Syntax for declaring an array variable in Java

```java
dataType[] arrayRefVar;     // preferred way

dataType arrayRefVar[];     // for accommodate C/C++ programmers, but not preferred, 
```

## Array Instantiation
Create an array by using the **new** operator with syntax:

```java
arrayRefVar = new dataType[arraySize];
```

The above statement does two things:

* It creates an array using new dataType[arraySize];
* It assigns the reference of the newly created array to the variable arrayRefVar.

So, we can combine: declaring an array variable, creating an array and assigning the reference of the array to the variable in one statement

```java
dataType[] arrayRefVar = new dataType[arraySize];
or
dataType[] arrayRefVar = {value0, value1, ..., valuek};
```

The array elements are accessed through the **index**. Array indices are 0-based; that is they start from 0 to **arrayRefVar.length-1**.

An array index is always a **whole number** and it can be a int, short, byte, or char.

Once an array is instantiated, **it size cannot be changed**.

Its size can be accessed by using the **length** field like **.length**. It is a **java final** instance field.

All java arrays implements **Cloneable** and **Serializable**.

#### ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException
One popular exception for java beginners is ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException. You get this exception when you access an array with an **illegal index**

## Java Array Default Values
After instantiate an array, default values are automatically assigned to it in the following manner.

* byte - default value is zero.
* short - default value is zero.
* int - default value is zero.
* long - default value is zero, 0L.
* float - default value is zero, 0.0f.
* double - default value is zero, 0.0d.
* char - default value is null, '\u0000'.
* boolean - default value is false.
* reference types - default value is null.

**Notice:** one popular cause of **NullPointerException** is accessing a **null** from a java array.

## Iterating a Java Array

```java
public class IterateJavaArray {
    public static void main(String args[]) {
        int marks[] = {98, 95, 91, 93, 97};
        //java array iteration using enhanced for loop
        for (int value : marks){
            System.out.println(value);
        }
    }
}
```

## Multidimensional Arrays
When a component type itself is a array type, then it is a multidimensional array.

```java
int[] marks, fruits, matrix[];
```

In the above code, matrix is a multidimensional array. You have to be careful in this type of java array declaration.

**Note:** A clone of a java multidimensional array will result in a **shallow copy**.

#### Iterate a java multidimensional array

```java
public class IterateMultiDimensionalJavaArray {
    public static void main(String args[]) {
        int sudoku[][] = { { 2, 1, 3 }, { 1, 3, 2 }, { 3, 2, 1 } };

        for (int row = 0; row < sudoku.length; row++) {
            for (int col = 0; col < sudoku[row].length; col++) {
                int value = sudoku[row][col];
                System.out.print(value);
            }
            System.out.println();
        }
    }
}
```

## Sort a Java array
Java api Arrays contains static methods for sorting. It is a best practice to use them always to sort an array.

```java
import java.util.Arrays;

public class ArraySort {
    public static void main(String args[]) {
        int marks[] = { 98, 95, 91, 93, 97 };
        System.out.println("Before sorting: " + Arrays.toString(marks));
        Arrays.sort(marks);
        System.out.println("After sorting: " + Arrays.toString(marks));
    }
}
//Before sorting: [98, 95, 91, 93, 97]
//After sorting: [91, 93, 95, 97, 98]
```

## Copy a Java array
The following options to copy a java array:

* We can use the util calls Arrays. It contains copyOf method for different java types.
* The most used class by a java beginner **System** has a static method to copy an array.
* Using its clone method, you can copy a java array. If the java array is multidimensional, it will be a shallow copy.
* Write your own for loop iterating through the java array and copy elements yourself. (least preferred).

## The Arrays Class
The java.util.Arrays class contains various static methods for sorting and searching arrays, comparing arrays, and filling array elements. These methods are overloaded for all primitive types.

1. **public static int binarySearch(Object[] a, Object key)**. The array must be sorted prior to making this call.
2. **public static boolean equals(long[] a, long[] a2)**
3. **public static void fill(int[] a, int val)**
4. **public static void sort(Object[] a)**

##### [Java Site Map](../java-sitemap)
